[Music]
welcome to the Moss
Report with your host Dr Ralph W
[Music]
Moss so this is Ralph moss and today we
have the the great honor of talking to
Dr Thomas and sa freed who is Professor
of biology at Boston College uh
Professor sa freed received his pH PhD
in genetics and biochemistry from the
University of Illinois in Urbana I guess
we pronounce it in
1976 he's best known for his work with
um metabolism and
ketosis uh and how it had intersects
with diet and illnesses such as epilepsy
and of course cancer uh Professor SE
freed is the author of about 200
peer-reviewed articles uh listed in
PubMed and about half of those
specifically concerned cancer so
Professor safre thank you so much for
joining us today well thanks very much
Ralph it's uh it's it's nice to to be
here so you remember that I came and I
visited you uh in Boston um Chestnut
Hill I guess it is uh uh at your lab in
um well must have been about eight years
ago and um the the occasion of that was
your publication of your book cancer as
a metabolic disease and I've had a
chance to read that book many times I I
mean I I've referenced it so many times
in my own writing and looking at it
again in preparation for this discussion
I really must say that I think that this
is one of the most revolutionary works
that has ever been published in the
cancer field
uh offhand I can't think of many other
books and I am a student of the history
of cancer and of cancer research and not
too many that really go to the root to
use the word the original origin of the
word radical and go to the root of the
problem and really try
to globally change thinking about this
disease so I and I think the book has
stood up very well over the past 10
years um in your book you make
some what I would say would be
surprising even astonishing statements
about cancer and so I want to ask you
about these and give you a chance to
explain them because they're going to
sound odd to or contradictory to a lot
of our listeners um the they are the
some cases the diametrical opposite of
the so-called conventional wisdom on
cancer but I think people will really
enjoy hearing um from the expert on you
know what what this means and why uh why
you've come to these views after uh
almost uh 40 years in the field um and
and if possible of course try to put it
in language that lay people can
understand because that's our our
audiences for the the person who's
dealing with cancer who's s seriously
interested in understanding the the
basis of this disease and its possible
cure so my my first the first thing that
you say that strikes me as being um uh
new to most people is the idea that some
if not most conventional anti-cancer
agents largely operate through reduced
caloric intake this is a strange notion
to most people could you explain what
you mean by that well um I can't be sure
whether all conventional treatments
work through that process but uh the
concept came to me I'm working with Dr
Perna Mukerji who who got her PhD in
calorie restriction and she and I have
been working together on this problem
for 20 years uh at least and and um when
we were doing some original work work
from with a drug uh called nutal um
deoxy noyin you know it doesn't make any
difference what the name of it is but it
it was supposed to stop ganglioside
biosynthesis and um which are complex
glycolipids you hear a lot about that
from tasac disease but cancer cells have
have have a have um abnormalities in
these gangly sides and I got my my PhD
in ganglioside
Biochemistry so we had a drug that
blocked ganglioside biosynthesis uh a
drug a company pharmaceutical company
had given us this drug to to look look
at changes in gangliosides and when we
put it on I don't we we do things you
know we put it on some mice that had
some tumors we were looking at other
things besides looking at TX disease and
things like this but we had some tumors
growing in the lamp and we put the we
gave this drug to the animals and um it
Shrunk The tumors tremendously and of
course the drug company got very very
excited about this as well as inhibiting
ganglioside
biosynthesis um so obviously it looked
as though we have a drug that would stop
ganglioside biosynthesis and at the same
time uh shrink the tumor well this
became you know a massively Interesting
Drug to this company and they had ideas
of patenting this drug and doing all
this kind of stuff and then uh Perna and
a couple of other people said well you
know you got to be careful about some of
these drugs because um if if if the drug
is working through a unique mechanism
like targeting ganglioside biosynthesis
you have to be sure that the drug isn't
also influencing some uh uh external
event something outside what you think
it might be um like maybe so uh we were
we were watching the mice you know it
was very interesting they were eating we
had to mix the the drug in with a
powdered chow and they were eating the
powdered Chow at the same level as the
uh control group that did not get the
drug uh but they were losing body weight
and I said wow this is interesting the
animals eating the drug were losing body
weight and I said the per I says do you
think the the the the therapeutic
benefit of this drug is is not through
inhibition of ganglioside biosynthesis
but rather through an inhibition of body
weight in other words the drug was
acting like something that would reduce
calorie and we put another group of mice
in after we saw this um phenomenon we
put another group a control group of
mice in that did not get the drug but we
took food away from them so that their
body weight matched exactly that of the
of the group that was getting was
getting the drug and uh what we found is
the tumor shrunk to the exact same size
uh as the animals that were getting the
drug and were losing body weight and
then when we looked at the ganglioside
composition of course the ganglioside
composition was significantly reduced in
the drug group but wasn't reduced at all
in the in the calorically restricted
group so consequently the drug had yes
it was inhibiting ganglioside
biosynthesis but it had not but the
inhibition of ganglioside biosynthesis
had nothing to do with the therapeutic
benefit of why the drug Shrunk the tumor
and then we l we later found out that
the that the drug blocked sucra activity
in in the intestines and what was
happening the mice were eating this food
but they weren't able to digest the food
so it was like an direct calorie
restriction and then we went on and
looked at many of the other drugs that
are being used in pharmaceutical like
IDE well you know we gave mice T olamide
and um yeah it killed the tumor but they
shrunk that it also caused massive body
weight as a matter of fact we couldn't
starve mice enough to to lose body
weight as fast as temol amide worked so
te temozolomide which is used in the in
the Leo blastoma brain cancer field
quite a bit
it seemed to increase basil metabolic
rate so even even our control mice if I
took all the food away from them they
could not drop body weight as fast as
the group that was getting the temis
olomide that's amazing so what what I'm
thinking in fact indirect calorie
restriction is one of the mechanisms
which we think is responsible for some
not all of course for some of the
therapeutic benefits of some of these
drugs so um so why why give drugs now we
don't need to do this anymore because um
we now know that all cancers rely on
glucose and glutamine for growth and all
we need to do is is restrict glucose and
glutamine uh we restrict um and this
will kill the majority of cancer cells
because they're one disease it's all all
cancers are the same and they can't live
without fermentation mechanism so when
you calorie restrict you're shutting
down glucose availability which is
shutting down their their glycolytic
fermentation process we'll get we'll get
into that um just saying you know the
bottom line is is that you're absolutely
right I can't be sure how many
successful cancer therapy therapeutic
drugs are working in part through
indirect calorie restriction but I
wouldn't be surprised if many of them do
I recently spoke to a patient uh who was
who had a g blastoma uh brain cancer and
was taking tadar or tamide is the
scientific name and
he was losing weight and it it and it
was strange because I didn't know this
what you just what you just said was
trying to figure out was this person in
Kia was he you know in kind of a free
fall in terms of his his weight but
perhaps now I know something about that
drug about tar that could actually the
drug itself could be causing that that
weight loss and you say that that that
alone is a kind of
anti-cancer agent but of course you
can't starve yourself to death are you
going to I mean even if a person stopped
eating and and there have been over the
over the years and in fact I'd say over
the over the decades attempts made to
kill cancer by by basically by water
fasting but at a certain point you kill
the person by by doing that right and so
that's not a strategy you have to you
have to do it the right way you know
there's a guy tanom he's all over the
web um he had Advanced prostate cancer
he has a lot of things on the web now
and uh he had he had like you he had
come to my office and he was in a 20-day
F he came with his son so he had already
been on a 20-day water only fast um uh
and you know I talk about this stuff but
I don't often meet people who are
actually doing it are actually sitting
in my office who haven't eaten for 20
days um but he he had he was diagnosed
he has a he's he's a French he speaks
French he has English and French uh
Productions on the web and he wanted to
let me know that he just did a series of
20-day water only fasts uh of course in
between time he was eating small amounts
of very highly nutritious foods but then
he would go on these 20-day fasts and he
Lo he would went from 130 a correction
230 pounds down to when I saw him he was
like 160 it looked great
um he had Advanced uh metastatic cancer
into the bones and and you know where
prostate cancer goes and now he's
completely without cancer and the
strange thing um that he always asked me
said when he went back to the oncologist
the oncologist never really asked him
what are you doing it was like well of
course I mean here's a guy you should be
right he should be dead in and you think
that the oncologist what are you and
then he says I'm I'm I'm I'm doing water
only fasting and the oncologist said
well I continue to do that if I were
you so you you can you can see now I
have to be honest with you um uh you
know this is pretty pretty Draconian way
to get rid of cancer but this guy is you
know eating now healthy vegetables and
all he's on the web and my other friend
JJ traon from France he was he has a
book coming out also JJ traon battling
Advanced metastatic kidney cancer and um
his battle was horrific um he's the only
pilot in air he's a Pilot Air France
flies the big jets and he's one of the
only one the only person to get his uh
license back after suffering Advanced
metastatic cancer and he he managed his
cancer using um ketogenic diets with
water only therapeutic fasting and um
primarily a non a non-ac
non-pharmacological approach but you
know it's very hard to bite the bullet
and do these kinds of things you know
our research is designed to adapt some
of this um with specific drugs in our
press pulse uh strategy so we can manage
these cancers without without as much um
you know food restriction as some of
these other folks have done but you know
the bottom line is the tumor cells need
the glucose to survive and these water
only therapeutic fasts are are really
pulling the glucose down um and starving
out these these tumor cells they can't
compete with normal cells when you put
the whole body under a stressful
condition the issue is the glutamine and
working on I was going to say that so
cancers um we know that about 90% of
cancers will light up on a pet scan uh
because presumably because the fdg
that's uh injected into them is a kind
of quote unquote non-digestible form of
glucose of sugar right and so you can
see where the cancer is
because after about an hour the um the
fdg contrast agent starts to accumulate
in the areas that crave or that are AVID
for glucose but so so I guess in the
naive view the view that I probably had
before I read your book um you would
think that um if you just deprive a
person deprive the body of gluc glucose
that you would then kill off 90% of
cancers but it seems like it's more
complicated than that because there are
other sources of nutrition if the cancer
is deprived of the glucose or even if
it's not I mean it could still be using
the most abundant free amino acid in the
body which is glutamine and perhaps
other things as well so this is sort of
the Crux of the matter if you if you get
rid of the theoretically if you get rid
of glucose or at least bring it down to
a a level that doesn't feed the cancer
um what do you do about the
glutamine well the glutamine we we can
Target that there are drugs that have
that are working on glutamine we use the
the drug da door uh uh um deoxy nor
leucine it's a glutamine analog and what
it does it shuts down the ability of the
cells to use uh to use glutamine it's a
Pang glutaminase inhibitor
people have used that drug in the past
Alone um and and what happens is you get
some kid some responses that are really
good and other responses that are really
bad but they never shut the glucose down
when they use the da so so we published
a big paper just just last year showing
how if you if you use a calorie
restricted ketogenic diet to shut down
the gly the glycolysis pathway and then
include the dawn you Slaughter these
cancer cells that you you have to
realize glutamine is metabolized to
glutamate to alphaa glutarate there is
no energy involved in the use of
glutamine glutamine is generating energy
in the TCA cycle the kreb cycle at the
Su COA liiga step it's a fermentation
mechanism because all cancer cells have
defective oxidative phosphorilation
we've we've shown this others have shown
this um you have to look under the
electron microscope to see this but when
you do in tissue preparations um so when
all other Amino acids it's like you said
maybe another amino acid but every other
amino acid needs to use energy to
metabolize its core structure to alphaet
glutarate which is the which is the key
precursor for mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation um so here's the
situation glutamine is the most abundant
amino acid in the body it's a pure gold
it's pure gold to a metastatic cancer
cell so one of the characteristics of
metastasis and CIA you get a lot of CIA
muscles start wasting way the muscles
are a great source of glutamine so the
cancer elic elicits the glutamine out of
the muscles and the patients you know
they eat food it looks like they're
wasting away because the cancer is
sucking down the glutamine so in order
to manage cancer you have to do two
things you've got to shut down the GL
the glycolysis the GL the glucose
availability and you have to take away
the glutamine so when you do a calorie
restricted ketogenic diet you lower
blood sugar and don't forget the ketones
are toxic to the tumor cells so they're
not only an alternative source of energy
for the brain and heart and other organs
they're actually toxic to the tumor
cells but the normal cells thrive on
ketones so you're you're then Shifting
the body over to a completely new
metabolic State and then you come in
with these glutamine Inhibitors and you
blast the hell out of these tumor cells
without toxicity to the rest of the body
it's not that complicated all you have
to know is the biology of the problem
but the drug Dawn that you talk about I
mean I know you use that in your
experiments but that's not available uh
to consumers or even to doctors as far
as I know am I wrong about that yeah no
I bet the the pharmaceutical companies
are building other things that are like
that as a matter of fact the group of
Johns Hopkins um they have a drug
they've modified Dawn a little bit it's
the same drug but they've kind of they
might be able to patent that it's under
clinical trial is that three three three
ROP pyate no no three bromopyruvate is a
a glycolysis inhibitor um so you don't
have to worry about Ian you can use
three bro it's very toxic though the
only problem with 3 BP got a lot of
toxicity yes so you know I mean we have
a drug metformin I mean metformin would
block the uptake of glucose to a certain
degree wouldn't it it's not that
effective you know I tried all this
stuff yeah you know it's it's okay I'm
not going to say people shouldn't take
it I mean it's not like you know it's
not it's not your Earth it's not your sh
Earth it's not your Prime ho um we know
what works uh we know how to work the
system it's a it's a strategy and we
published it in the Press pulse concept
uh could you could you explain the Press
Paul's concept please yeah the Press
Paul well that there was Aaron's um a
paleobiologist actually come up he said
the the eradication of organisms on the
planet always happened when you have two
unlikely events happening at the same
time and basically uh and this was the
responsible for these Mass distinctions
that we had in Earth's prehistory um so
you have a you have some sort of a
chronic stress on a population it's it's
strong enough to weed out the weak and
but the stronger organisms kind of kind
of hang on and then you have some sort
of catastrophic pulse like a meteor
strike or a volcano explosion or and and
it wipes out everything so you you all
you already have a weakened system by a
chronic stress uh and then you wipe out
the whole system with a with an acute
pulse so what what we do we just simply
ad adopted that concept to the
management of cancer so what we do is we
take humans and mice and whatever and we
bring them into a new metabolic State as
it and we put chronic stress on the
tumor and as you said Ralph you can't
kill all the tumor cells by just taking
away glucose because some of them will
will hang on using glutamine so the
concept of of bringing the body into a
new state is we remove systemic
inflammation which is important for
driving the tumor with the with the with
the Press calorie restricted ketogenic
diet we call it ketogenic metabolic
therapy the patient starts getting
really healthy but the tumor cells are
hanging around they're they're not like
all going they're not dropping Dead all
over and then we come in with glutamine
inhibitor so when the patient is in
therapeutic ketosis High GL low glucose
elevated ketones you then come in with
the drugs and low doses you don't have
to these thesee high doses because once
the patient is in therapeutic ketosis we
showed that these drugs work even better
at lower dosage you just need a little
bit more to to chronically uh to acutely
kill off the survivors and you do this
without harm to the patient the toxicity
is is minimal if if at all and you just
gradually uh degrade these tumors
switching from uh from chronic stress to
pulse stress and back and forth and the
next thing you know um either the tumor
shrinks to very small levels or or it
disappears completely and and we've seen
this in so many people they say where's
the clinical trials on this well you
can't do a double blind crossover on
pulse press you wna you want to live or
you want to be part of a clinical trial
so uh um you know it's it's your choice
I mean I I don't I mean it's up to
people yes but but again I'll come back
to the question of how do you attack the
the the glutamine Source because again
the do or the dawn I couldn't find a
source for that and I don't know I've
seen some I've seen some writings on the
internet saying that maybe these
anti-worm medications mebendazol and
fendol uh might act as as as Inhibitors
of glutamine also I've seen some
indication and I had some confirmation
of this that Dr Stanis Bin's
antineoplastons might act as as blockers
of glutamine uptake but what practically
speaking and I'm sure that 90% of our
listeners are in one way or another
dealing with cancer or have it in
somebody in the family or want to
prevent recurrence practically speaking
how do you do this I mean is there a
diet that people could use other other
than this the fasting but is there
something that practical that people can
do to be able to attack the the
sources and other words is to quote from
Jane mullen's uh book is there really a
way to starve
the cancer
cell yeah well you're right about the
glutamine issue and Don um you know
there are a number of companies Cayman
will produce on um it's hard to get um
it has to be delivered IV intravenous as
well so you you you it's a little bit
more not that you know Physicians do
intervenous treatment all the time I
mean this is not a not a medically
difficult situation the problem is Don
is not is not um approved I I I don't
don't even want to say it's not improved
because it had been used prior to on PE
on people with cancer there are some um
you know many many studies published
where where Dawn was used but it was
never used together with targeting the
glucose U but you're 100% right you know
where do you get this there are a number
of companies in China that make Dawn the
problem is I I I've invalidated you know
whether whether all these all the
products from these companies are are
are are good or not I mean you have to
do it I do it on a pre-clinical system
before I recommend it for any I mean we
get the drug from from Sigma scientific
Corporation I mean if I had cancer I
mean I would get it from Sigma or
someplace um it's against the law it's
against the law you wna you want to keep
your alive who
cares mean you have to be practical
about me we have evidence I mean we we
already showed that when you administer
the drug with the ketogenic diet we
delivered two to three-fold more drug
through the bloodb brain barrier when it
was administered with the ketogenic diet
I mean give me a break
I mean they're trying to figure out all
the ways to get through blood brain
barrier you just put it on a ketogenic
and we did it with a different kind of a
drug too so ketogenic diets facilitate
transmission of small molecules into the
brain to to Target brain cancer it's
just that simple yeah we publ we
published this now what's the oh what's
the mechanism we don't know but but the
but the bottom line is we've quantitated
using mass spectrometry to show that
there is more drug going through the
blood brain barrier um so you don't need
the high doses that you used to need to
to get in there right so it's a that's
why I'm saying press pulse works as a
beautiful synergistic interaction
between the different kinds of therapies
um you're right now there are a number
of drugs that the pharmaceutical
Industries are producing trying to mimic
the effects of dawn okay there's a CB
833 or they got these numbers for them
for these things um I'm not sure if
they're as powerful as Dawn and as I
said the Johns hop
John John's Hopkins group is doing a lot
of work on a dawn type analog um I think
these will come um the problem is they
they just use that so they go out and do
a clinical trial using just the
glutamine inhibitor and they say well
you know it's marginally effective well
you're not targeting the glucose man you
got to Target both what's the matter
then they say well we can't do that
because we won't know if it's our drug
that works or whether it's this that
works you know we're interested in
keeping people alive without toxicity
we're not interested the same old same
old reductionism of we have to study one
thing at a time and it may be a Synergy
between different things yeah well see
we have the we've developed here at
Boston College the single best series of
animal models for cancer systemic
metastatic cancer gleo blastoma all
natural these things are not these
genetically engineered things that are
artificial not this xenograph taking
human cells and Gro on the ass of a
mouse I mean this kind of stuff is is
you know it's not natural stuff I mean
not to say that these are the are are
bad models they just don't provide that
you don't you want a model system that's
going to replicate what goes on in the
human okay and this is what we have so
we know that the model systems that we
have when when we see it working in
these in these in these mice that we
develop we know it's going to work in
humans and we have seen it uh do this
the problem now is what we do to keep
mice alive as long as we can are very
difficult to do these experiments in in
clinical trials uh only because we we
you know we have a op pressed diet and
we pulse with drugs at certain
frequencies um and you know to do a
people know what they're I mean it's
hard to do a double blind on these kinds
of things so um you know so but the
bottom line is if you have historical
controls like GBM where most of the
people are dead within two years you
know G Gast yeah gasta and and if you
have guys that are living five and six
years on metabolic therapy then you
might want to figure out what the H why
why are they doing so well we have Pablo
Kelly over in England he's now six years
out with no no radiation no chemo just
metabolic therapy um we have other
people Andrew Scarboro we're getting
numbers of people Allison ganet more and
more people are coming on board uh
because they want to stay alive you know
and I wrote a big paper uh clearly with
with Joe maroon team surgeon for the
Pittsburgh Steelers and neurosurgeon at
upit um showing that the standards of
care for gleo blastoma are largely
responsible for the rapid recurrence and
demise of the patients
umate brain you shouldn't irradiate per
people's brains I already showed it
creates Fusion hybridization and sends
these tumor cells out the use of of
Astin or bismid should be banned uh this
is a drug that that contributes to the
yet they use it the time it contributes
to massive Invasion through the brain
and um temola mind you know it's it's
like what are you doing to these people
um you know we can manage these cancers
so much better on metabolic therapy but
my colleagues in the field are yolked
they can't do it they won't they're not
allowed to treat patients with metabolic
therapy until all other therapies are
shown not to work and I'm saying well
you know your damn therapy is not going
to work so why don't you come up from oh
we can't do that the IR B won't allow us
to do that and there we we're yolked so
these poor folks the the patients are
are are trapped in a system that's a
failed system putting their lives at
risk for the maintenance of of
procedures that don't work it's like
it's a tragedy Monumental tragedy yes
and we we hear a lot about ketogenic
diet but I think from the certainly from
the time that you wrote cancer as a
metabolic disease you were always saying
uh it's not just ketogenic diet it's
also calorie restriction but that's a
lot harder a lot harder for people I
mean unless they're they they their back
is against the wall the idea of
combining the cutting back on their food
we're such a consumer society that we
like to take things as opposed to
telling people how do
less but it has to do with the species
in in the Mouse um when we when we fed
the mice ketogenic diets add libidum let
means unrestricted and we had a
ketogenic diet that they liked uh they
would scarf it down they would get
insulin insensitivity and the tumors
would grow much faster so we would have
to calorie restrict this human beings um
naturally Cal the the the the hormone
chinin is an
anti- appetite hormone it's the it
stimulates the eighth the 10th crani of
nerve to shut down appetite so when you
eat a a bunch of fat all often times
humans just don't they they stop eating
this is why the ketogenic diet is use a
weight loss diet so people are eating
ketogenic diets they're losing weight
they say how can I lose weight by eating
all this fat because you turning on kly
cystic kind and shut down your appetite
so that happens more in humans than it
does humans do a hell of a lot better on
this than the mice do um so you know we
have to be very careful the mice eating
too much ketogenic diet whereas humans
they don't eat much they and they have a
lot of good food sources very
nutritional avocados and different kinds
of of of foods that have that have high
fat content low carbohydrate content and
you just measure your glucose Ketone
index and this this is what we also
developed here at Boston College was the
the glucose Ketone index so it allows
people to know uh the ratio of blood
sugar to blood ketones to know whether
or not they're in therapeutic ketosis
and this can vary from one person to the
next so some guy might eat one thing and
get into ketosis another guy might eat
something very different get into the
same ratio it's when you're in that
ratio is when the chronic stress goes on
to the tumor cells and once you're in
therapeutic ketosis yeah then you go on
you take a drug that will Target the
glutamine and uh you work it that way
and I think this is going to be the the
future this is what I just told you is
the future it's just it may take people
screaming and kicking to go into it but
you know bottom line is people want to
live that's I mean for sure motivation
for life I mean that's be honest so the
ketones the Ketone bodies as they're as
they're called these are I just to
explain for the the lay
um listener these are chemicals that are
produced in the body when there's a when
they there's an absence of uh
carbohydrates for the generation of
energy so the body has a a fallback
mechanism right to produce these K now
you're saying that the that not only uh
do these serve as an alternative uh
source of fuel for normal cells but that
they're actually toxic to cancer cells
how does that
happen well what what what what we think
is that they generate reactive oxygen
species in the tumor cells and the and
the Ros kills them um you know all we
know is that we we and others have tried
to grow cancer cells uh in ketones and
they die and all not only ketones fatty
acids as well uh if you you cannot
cancer cells need glucose and glutamine
you can't fatty acids and ketones cannot
replace glucose and glutamine and even
what we find is even in the presence of
glucose and glutamine the Ketone bodies
can be toxic to the tumor cells now you
you have to have a good normal cells
burn Ketone we evolved as a species in
fact we as as a human species we evolve
to starve our history on the planet has
been one of constant starvation um so we
we have adopted uh we have selected in
our genomes incredible means of storing
energy store energy in the form of of of
fat but we also burn we can you know our
history was not at at McDonald's
hamburgers and and and Taco Bell and all
these other things that were pounding in
and and the Obesity epidemic is only the
result of our incredible uh history of
being able to store energy so um we're
in a new a new environment now which is
which is producing us producing type two
diabetes obesity Cancer all these other
kinds of diseases uh based on our
incredible ability to store energy
because we evolved over millions of
years as a starved species nobody was
really fat um you get your you get your
fat from bone eating bone marrow um or
sweet maybe during a particular periods
of the season when you have a a ripe
fruit or a berry or something but our
our our our ability to survive was based
on on on burning fats and fats uh
themselves are broken down to Ketone
bodies because the brain can't can only
use ketones or glucose it cannot use
fatty acids so in order to keep our
brain functional when we're not taking
in carbs we burn fat the fat goes to the
liver and the liver makes Ketone bodies
which are small water soluble fat
breakdown products and they can provide
the brain with all the energy that we
need um so so but the you have to have a
good mitochondria in in the cell to burn
the ketones for energy and we now know
that all cancer cells have defect
mitochondria they can't burn the ketones
so and they can't use fatty acids either
you need a good mitochondria to generate
energy from fatty acids so what cancer
cells do is they store fatty acids they
form these little droplets and in fact
if you look at under the electron
microscope at tumor cells and even
sometimes under the light light you see
all these vacu these storage vaces and
you're saying what the hell is going on
they're storing the fats because that's
the way to protect them they protect
themselves because the fats will kill
them if if if they're try go into the
they'll cause too many reactive oygen
species so they little in these little
and these little vaces in the
cells they're sort of isolating the fact
so yeah in this sense you maybe I
misread Jan mullen's uh thesis but it
seemed as if one of the ways that she
maybe disagreed with you was um
emphasizing that cancers need fatty
acids um if I read her correctly and we
did an interview with her no well this
is yeah this is kind not true yeah no no
it's it appears that way that cancers
need fatty acids the the issue is that
the fatty acids stimulate glutaminolysis
and glycolysis can you believe this so
we showed we have a paper coming out so
it looks like oh yeah cancer cells need
fatty acids well the fatty acids aren't
used by the cancer cell directly the
fatty acids stimulate the tumor cells to
take up more glucose and glutamine so
it's an indirect effect of the fatty
acids so um so yeah so a lot you'll see
a lot of papers published in the in the
literature saying oh yeah fatty acids
are used by the tumor cells and they're
sucking down glucose and glutamine well
you take away the glucose and glutamine
and give them the fatty acids and see
what happens they croak um uh so a lot
of people don't do the right kinds of
experiments uh they think tumor cells
have normal respiration when they don't
um because if you look under the
electron microscope they have no criste
the mitochondrial will screwed up
they're not going to be able to burn
fatty acids or ketones people have to
come to realize that otherwise the
ketogenic diet should make tumors grow
10 times faster and they don't yes so um
basically uh all cancers are defective
or in terms of the
mitochondria uh which are the energy
producing elements within the cell and
uh if I remember um our our mutual
friend Pete Peterson at Johns Hopkins uh
who wrote the introduction to your book
uh saying that uh on average cancer
cells have half as many mitochondria as
normal cells so it's basically what what
you've sort of gone back to OV varberg
1924 uh basically locating the origin of
cancer in the mitochondria am I correct
yeah um the thing about uh Auto uh
orberg and his colleagues is they were
focused he he his argument was that all
cancer cells ferment glucose because
their oxidative phosphorilation is
defective and uh people then went often
said oh but all these cancer cells have
taken in oxygen and making and making
ATP in the mitochondria therefore
warberg must be wrong yeah uh we what we
have found is that the energy coming out
of the mitochondria the few mitochondria
that might be present in cancer is not
coming from oxidative phosphorilation
it's coming from mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation
uh driven by glutamine and through the
glutaminolysis pathway warberg did not
know about this only because that
mechanism was not discovered until the
very end of his life or the towards the
end of his career um and and even
warberg himself made the era of thinking
that that when tumor cells take in
oxygen that that oxygen is producing ATP
through oxidative phosphorilation in the
in the um electron which which to
explain is the normal method by which
cell cell normal cells produce energy
right all of we're breathing everybody's
breathing um and and we breathe because
we need the uh oxygen as the final
acceptor for the electrons in the
electron transport chain so we can
generate
ATP um but the cancer cells if you look
at them in culture you say wow look at
these cancer cells they're taken in
oxygen just as much as a normal cell
therefore they must have normal oxas
wrong we showed this that taken in Ox
using it for different reasons others
other scientists have shown this as well
so where the hell are they getting their
energy from so they're getting their
energy from glutamine it's coming
through and it's making massive energy
in the TCA cycle it's a substrate level
phosphorilation here's another thing
Ralph which has been recently found that
many tumor cells have the pyruvate kyes
M2 isoform in the cytoplasm they don't
in other words you're not get it doesn't
make ATP it it you can make lactic acid
but you're you're making metabolites for
growth but you're not making ATP without
energy being the main source of energy
packets of energy right energy is ener
you you can't live without nothing on
the planet can live without energy
cancer cells can't live with energy we
can't you you drink cyanides let's see
how how long you live when you drink
cyanide you shut down the whole system
you die all right so so where the hell
are the cancer cells getting their
energy from if it's if it's not through
glycolysis
and it's not through the electron
transport chain where the hell are these
cells getting their energy to live it
comes from mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation that's why when you
target glutamine and you've taken away
glucose these cells drop dead fast and
you can do that and this this is the new
thing the new thing that people don't
understand is that the cancer cells are
getting the majority of their energy
from mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation giving the appearance
that they might be using oxidative
phosphor coration but they're not cancer
cells can grow in cyanide we can't grow
in we can't live in Cy why the hell is a
cancer cell living in cyanite because
it's fermenting it's fermenting it's not
you know so it doesn't it doesn't need
oxygen no doesn't need oxygen at all
right right so um and warberg showed
that and uh he he poured cyanide on his
tumor so couldn't believe it you know so
uh I mean you have a person with
metastatic cancer and they drop de of a
heart attack I mean their body is dead
but the tumor cells in that body are
still alive they'll be alive for maybe a
couple of days so uh as long as they can
get fermentable fuel
amazing so the takeaway the takeaway
message here is that it is possible to
control cancer by controlling the the
fuel the food supply basically to the
cancer and the main things to worry
about would be glucose meaning uh
carbohydrates that would turn into um
increased blood glucose and glutamine
which is the common free amino acid is
there is there some other than fasting
is there some diet that would minimize
the amount of glutamine that's available
no glutamine glutamine can be made from
other sources so it's really it's that's
why they call it a non-essential amino
acid you can make glutamine from gluc
however when you're shutting down
glucose you're also restricting at least
in the brain you're also going to be
cutting a little bit back on the
glutamine but glutamine is such an IG uh
um ubiquitous amino acids like
everywhere and it's also involved it's
it's extremely important for the Ura
cycle as as Hans kreb showed uh it's
extremely important for the function of
our immune system our um the the new
Scoles from from Oxford University in
England showed that glutamine is the
main fuel for cells of our immune system
we also know um so you for our gut uh
Health you know know um you know a lot
of cancer patients are given high dose
glutamine to help repair and the damage
to their body so um so it's it has a
double-edged sword on that mole you got
to be careful because at the same time
we need the molecule we also know it's
driving our cancer so um and people now
need to know and there's no diet that I
know of that will restrict glutamine so
it's got to be a that's why we use press
pulse the diets are okay for shutting
down glucose but then we have to use
certain low do drugs to work together
for this uh ketogenic metabolic therapy
using press pulse strategy what would
those drugs be well those you know like
I said Don and the listen believe me the
pharmac here's the situation you can't
patent on um because it's it's it's a
pan what I mean by it's a pan
glutaminase inhibitor so it inhibits
multiple glutaminases
simultaneously what the what the big
companies would like to do is produce a
drug that would do what Dawn can do um
the problem is they haven't been
successful yet in developing that kind
of a drug um and many of the drugs that
they have tried are toxic they're too
toxic so um but believe me this I would
say that looking for the glutamine
inhibitor that's non-toxic is probably
one of the big hidden secrets of the pH
of the cancer pharmaceutical I mean
obviously they're using all these
immunotherapies and carti that's that's
that's nuts too it in my mind because
it's based on the sematic mutation
Theory and we know that the sematic
mutation theory is now is now uh under
serious re-evaluation so you have to
have you have to have therapies that are
based on the underlying biological
problem of the disease I mean I'm not
saying that immunotherapy pdl1
Inhibitors and carte immunotherapy and
these kinds of things don't work on on
some people but they kill people too
they're very expensive they can be
incredibly toxic so why are you doing
that when you don't need to do it you
know this is the this is the crazy thing
that I can't find I mean what are you
doing you understand the biology of the
problem why are you doing that why are
you doing all that nonsense you know
it's like give me a
break well I mean uh the the drugs
phenomenally profitable 8.8 billion for
k k truda last year um but they're being
uh given at a much too high a level if
you reduce the dose to about a third of
what's currently being done you don't
lose any of the effectiveness in fact
you increase the effectiveness and you
reduce the serious side effects to about
on10th the level of what's currently
existing so it's a money-driven thing
but there is some Tru there is some
truth to the fact that you can mobilize
the immune system but um I mean that for
me the the takeaway message is what you
just said when most people of course
they're focused on what can they do now
Visa their own cancer but it's also you
know we can't as s Albert St Georg used
to say you can't really uh you can't
really solve a problem that you don't
understand you can't cure a disease that
you don't understand and so uh the
understanding is that 95 whatever
percent of scientists believe that
cancer is a genetic disease and and
that's in fact it's l almost like
written Stone over the entrance to the
National Cancer Institute I mean they
Lally it's the first sentence of one of
the big texts of the NCI you started or
you accelerated a movement to understand
cancer not as a genetic disease but as a
metabolic disease and where the focus
isn't on the nucleus and the and the
genome but the focus is on the the
cytoplasm and specifically on the
mitochondria within the cytoplasm I
think that's a
revolutionary event and you you the
person who's mainly in modern times
mainly responsible for that I would say
and that's a tremendous achievement so
it's uh it's it's really a pleasure to
talk to you because it's really like you
you started something here that I think
could really result in a complete
reconceptualization of the cancer
problem yeah well I think that's true
and and um you know I've I've I mean we
did the nuclear transfer experiments I I
didn't do those but I I I put them
together in one in one big uh for the
first first time putting them all
together um where everybody could see
the commonality in in in replacing bad
mitochondria with good mitochondria and
managing the cancer regardless of the
mutations in the nucleus and and then we
went on now new new papers are coming
out showing that there are some cancers
that have no mutations all right um Now
new the new stuff is coming out showing
that you have all these driver mutations
in normal cells that never develop
cancer um then we have the chimpanze are
closest biological relative 98 almost
99% identical in genome and protein
sequence and there's never been a
documented case of breast cancer in a
female
chimpanzee um yet they're genetically
the same as we are so um you know you
put that together and you say oh wow we
have cancer cells that have no mutations
we have normal cells with driver
mutations we have chimpanzees that never
get cancer and you say yourself I mean
how in the hell are you able to say that
cancer is a genetic disease it makes
absolutely no sense and and you know
anybody who wants to sit down and think
about that comes to you have to if you
have a rational thinking mind you have
to come to the conclusion there's no way
in hell cancer can be a genetic disease
um so we put it all together and now we
realize and and and without energy these
tumor cells can't live where do they get
their energy from from fermentation what
drives fermentation glucose and
glutamine well why don't we focus on the
glucose and glutamine issue and when you
do you get you get results that are much
better than anything that's currently
being used in the in the cancer industry
I have it's not that complicated I have
one more question for you which has
always been on my mind and that is that
um you know Thompson Craig Thompson
who's the president of Memorial slone
ketering uh is also in this field sort
of in the in terms of glutamine and
metabolism and they at he and his and
Memorial son ketering patented a
glutamine pet scan uh but they never
Comm they never commercialized it they
have the patent on it and I'm not I'm
not making conspiracy theories here I'm
sure they must have run into different
problems and so forth but my question is
this if you had if if they would ever
develop the glutamine pet scan in other
words to see where there was increased
glutamine uptake the way they can see
where this increased glucose uptake what
do you think it would show I mean do you
think that cancers are
predominantly tumors are
predominantly uh
glucose uh uh utilizing
machines and not glutamine or do you
think that a lot of tumors are doing
both increased uptake of glucose and
glutamine or are are some tumors as I
suspect some tumors are mainly just
dependent on glutamine for instance
cancers that are growing and don't light
up on a pet scan pretty much you can
assume right that those are going to be
turned out to be glutamine dependent but
where's the line is it is it that could
you for in other words what I'm asking
is theoretically do you think it would
be possible if you could severely cut
down on the amount of glucose going to
the tumor through the various means that
exist to bypass the glutamine question
entirely yeah I mean these are very
important questions and the the the
answer is that it depends on the cell um
some some tumors will be more glutamine
dependent and others will be more
glucose dependent but the but in my in
my mind uh both fuels are used uh we
have some tumors here that are more
glutamine dependent than glucose
dependent and we have just the reverse
on some other tumors and that I think is
what the is what the cancer field has
already has already determined that you
have um oftentimes there's very few
tumors that we know of that are purely
glucose or purely glutamine dependent um
uh tumors that have mutations in the TCA
cycle which in other words block or
disrupt the the the glutaminolysis
pathway indirectly forcing that cell now
to use more glucose um they become more
glucose dependent um but major but
majority of the here's the situation we
have two things the glucose is primarily
the carbons of glucose are serving as
the building blocks for the synthesis of
proteins and amino acids and lipids and
these kinds of things so the cells can
grow the energy that drives the process
is primarily coming from glutamine
through the mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation as well as the
glutamine nitrogen the nitrogen is
needed for DNA and RNA and protein
synthesis so the the amid nitrogen on
glutamine is used as a precursor um for
growth along with the carbons of glucose
so the carbons of both of these
molecules are distributed through the
cell for the rapid growth synthesis of
the various building blocks that they
need DNA and RNA and protein synthesis
so it's a combination of of of needing
both fuels for the proliferation of that
cell and and I look at it as an purely
energy because every cell uh has a pump
on the membrane surface it's called the
sodium potassium
atpa it burns ATP in order to keep a
gradient of ions across the membrane and
that allows the cell to be alive and
life means you're you're you're not at
equilibrium and to remain to away from
equilibrium you need energy and when the
energy to the pumps fail the cell swells
and dies okay it's not that complicated
so where the hell is the energy coming
to maintain the pump activity whether
you're a cancer cell a brain cell any
kind of a cell you need to maintain the
activity of the pump so it's all energy
so if I pull the plug on the energy the
pumps will not get the ATP and they'll
fail and they'll kill so the cell the
tumor cell is dependent on glutamine for
energy and uh and glucose for growth so
you pull the plug simultaneously on
glucose and glutamine and the problem
becomes manageable but yet there's not a
single clinical trial anywhere on the
planet that's simultaneously targeting
glucose and glutamine unbelievable un
unbelievable it is it is well listen I
hope we can continue this discussion
some point in the future and
tremendously appreciate you coming on
the podcast and I'm sure that the the
listeners will too talking to uh
Professor Thomas safreed of Boston
College who's done the remarkable work
of showing how cancers are dependent on
glucose and glutamine for energy and how
that could be used uh as an effective
cancer treatment so thank you so much
Tom for for agreeing to be on the on the
show thank you very much Ralph Real
pleasure thank you for listening to the
Moss report visit our website at the
Moss report.com And subscribe to hear
more discussion of cancer treatment
options alternative research and more
for more information about Dr Moss and
his work including scheduling phone
consultations go to Moss reports.com
[Music]